--- 
title: Shotgun
date: 23/08/2010

In my [previous post](http://http://thedersen.com/2010/08/05/new-blog-in-five-minutes/) I wrote about using the thin web server to run your Rack app locally. This works fine, but there is one issue. If you change your code or configuration you have to restart the server. This is not a big deal, but it do get quite annoying after a while. The solution is a gem called [Shotgun](http://github.com/rtomayko/shotgun).

From the [readme](http://github.com/rtomayko/shotgun/blob/master/README):
>The shotgun command starts one of Rack's supported servers (e.g., mongrel, thin,
webrick) and listens for requests but does not load any part of the actual
application. Each time a request is received, it forks, loads the application in
the child process, processes the request, and exits the child process. The
result is clean, application-wide reloading of all source files and templates on
each request.

As you can see, there in no longer a need to restart your server when code has changed, Shotgun does it for you. Nice.

To get going you need to install the gem

	$ sudo gem install shotgun

To start the web server, simply type
	$ shotgun
if the current directory contains the config.ru file, or specify the config file like this
	$ shotgun config.ru
The output should be something like
	== Shotgun/Mongrel on http://127.0.0.1:9393/
telling you which server got started and on what port it is listening.

There are some more options available, which you can find by looking at the help
	$ shotgun --help
	
	Ruby options:
	  -e, --eval LINE          evaluate a LINE of code
	  -d, --debug              set debugging flags (set $DEBUG to true)
	  -w, --warn               turn warnings on for your script
	  -I, --include PATH       specify $LOAD_PATH (may be used more than once)
	  -r, --require LIBRARY    require the library, before executing your script

	Rack options:
	  -s, --server SERVER      server (webrick, mongrel, thin, etc.)
	  -o, --host HOST          listen on HOST (default: 127.0.0.1)
	  -p, --port PORT          use PORT (default: 9393)
	  -E, --env ENVIRONMENT    use ENVIRONMENT for defaults (default: development)

	Shotgun options:
	  -O, --browse             open browser immediately after starting
	  -u, --url URL            specify url path (default: /)
	  -P, --public PATH        serve static files under PATH
	  -h, --help               show this message
	      --version            show version
	
